The President:
All across America,
people work hard to meet
their responsibilities.
You do your job, take care of
your family, pay your bills.
Sometimes, particularly
in tough times like these,
you have to make hard choices
about where to spend and where to save.
That's what being
responsible means.
It's a bedrock value
of our country.
And that ought to be a value
that our government lives up to as well.
Yet, over the past decade, this
hasn't always been the case.
Ten years ago, we had a big
budget surplus with projected
surpluses far into the future.
Ten years later, those
surpluses are gone.
In fact, when I first
walked through the door,
the government's budget
deficit stood at $1.3 trillion,
with the budget gap over the
next decade projected to be $8 trillion.
Now partly, the
recession's to blame.
With millions of
people out of work,
and millions of families
facing hardship,
folks are paying less in taxes
while seeking more services,
like unemployment benefits.
Rising health care
costs are also to blame.
Each year, more and more tax
dollars are devoted to Medicare
and Medicaid.
But what also has made these large deficits possible was the
end of a common sense rule
called "pay as you go."
It's pretty simple.
It says to Congress, you
have to pay as you go.
You can't spend a dollar unless
you cut a dollar elsewhere.
This is how a responsible family
or business manages a budget.
This is how a responsible government manages a budget, as well.
It was this rule that helped
lead to balanced budgets in the
1990s, by making clear that we
could not increase entitlement
spending or cut taxes simply
by borrowing more money.
And it was the abandonment
of this rule that allowed the
previous administration and
previous congresses to pass
massive tax cuts for the wealthy
and create an expensive new drug
program without
paying for any of it.
Now in a perfect world, Congress
would not have needed a law to
act responsibly, to remember
that every dollar spent would
come from taxpayers today
-- or our children tomorrow.
But this isn't a perfect world.
This is Washington.
And while in theory there is
bipartisan agreement on moving
forward on balanced
budgets, in practice,
this responsibility for the
future is often overwhelmed by
the politics of the moment.
It falls prey to the pressures
of special interest groups,
to the pull of local concerns,
and to a reality familiar to
every single American -- the fact that it's a lot easier to
spend a dollar than save one.
That's why this
rule is necessary.
And that's why I'm pleased that Congress fulfilled my request to
restore it.
Last night, I signed the "pay
as you go" rule into law.
Now Congress will have
to pay for what it spends,
just like everybody else.
But that's not all we must do.
Even as we make critical
investments to create jobs today
and lay a foundation
for growth tomorrow --
by cutting taxes for
small businesses,
or investing in education,
or promoting clean energy,
and modernizing our
roads and railways --
we have to continue to go
through the budget line by line,
looking for ways to save.
We have to cut where we
can, to afford what we need.
This year, I've proposed another
$20 billion in budget cuts.
And I've also called for a
freeze in government spending
for three years.
It won't affect benefits
through Medicare, Medicaid,
or Social Security.
And it will not affect
national security --
including benefits for veterans.
But it will affect the
rest of the budget.
Finally, I've proposed a
bipartisan Fiscal Commission to
provide recommendations for
long-term deficit reduction.
Because in the end, solving
our fiscal challenge --
so many years in the making -- will take both parties coming
together, putting
politics aside,
and making some hard choices about what we need to spend,
and what we don't.
It will not happen
any other way.
Unfortunately this proposal -- which received the support of a
bipartisan majority in the Senate -- was recently blocked.
So, I will be creating this
commission by executive order.
After a decade of profligacy,
the American people are tired of
politicians who talk the talk
but don't walk the walk when it
comes to fiscal responsibility.
It's easy to get up in front
of the cameras and rant against
exploding deficits.
What's hard is actually
getting deficits under control.
But that's what we must do.
Like families
across the country,
we have to take responsibility
for every dollar we spend.
And with the return
of "pay as you go,"
as well as other steps
we've begun to take,
that is exactly
what we are doing.
Thanks.